---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: "PhotoApp: Server-Side Templates with Flask"
abbreviation: HW2
type: homework
due_date: 2022-01-25
ordering: 2
draft: 1
points: 20
---

* A note on collaboration: the collaboration and code sharing policy is the same as [HW1](hw01).

## 1. Introduction
In this assignment, you will be building on the work you did in HW1 by converting the static HTML file that you made into a data-driven, server-side template. You will also be creating some routes that serve JSON data, in preparation for HW3 (building a REST API).

As we saw in [Lab 2](lab02), the Jinja templates (used by flask) allow python logic to be evaluated from within the HTML template, using various markup tags (see <a href="https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/templates/" target="_blank">Jinja documentation</a>). This allows you to create custom, server-generate HTML files that merge with data that is relevant for the current user. For this lab, we will be working with fake data, which we will generate using the `faker` python module. In HW3, we will be connecting to a database.
* **Pro Tip:** For those of you who plan to take more prototyping courses after this one, `faker` is a great way to create fake API data for testing and prototyping.

## 2. Background Readings
* Some flask resources and accessibility resources here

## 3. Setup

### 1. Organize files
1. Download the HW2 starter files
1. Copy the `index.html` file that you created in HW1 into the `templates` directory.
1. Copy the `style.css` file that you created in HW1 into the `static` directory.
1. Inside of the `head` section of your `index.html` file, update the address of your `style.css` as follows: `href="/static/style.css"`. When you're done, your file system should look like this:

```bash
XXX
YYY
ZZZ
```

### 2. Configure and run your flask server
Please install the dependencies:
```bash
pip3 install -r requirements.txt

# If the above command doesn't work, try one of the commands below (however you did it for lab2):
# py -m pip install -r requirements.txt
# python3 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
# python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Next, set your environment variables and run your local server:

#### Mac or Linux
```bash
# set environment variables (you just have to do this once per session)
export FLASK_APP=app.py     
export FLASK_ENV=development

# then run flask (type Ctrl+C to quit)
flask run
```

#### Windows
```bash
# set environment variables (you just have to do this once per session)
set FLASK_APP=app.py
set FLASK_ENV=development

# then run flask (type Ctrl+C to quit)
flask run
# alternative commands to try if "flask run" doesn't work:
# py -m flask run
# python3 -m flask run
# python -m flask run
```

You should see the following output:
```bash
 * Serving Flask app "app.py" (lazy loading)
 * Environment: development
 * Debug mode: on
 * Running on http://127.0.0.1:5000/ (Press CTRL+C to quit)
 * Restarting with stat
 * Debugger is active!
 * Debugger PIN: 273-580-071
 ```

## 3. Requirements

{:#navbar}
### 1. Navigation Bar (n points)

{:#recommendations}
### 2. Recommendations Panel (n points)

{:#stories}
### 3. Stories Panel (n points)

{:#cards}
### 4. Cards Panel (n points)

### 5. Accessibility
Next steps re: accessibility:
* Making sure your website makes sense w/o CSS
* Load times.
* Turn off images and see if the site is coherent.
* Download the WAVE Extension -- Use one of the automated testing resources and take a screenshot, submit it, and address issues or talk about how you would.

{:#github}
### 6. GitHub (1 point)
When you're done, please commit all of your changes and push them to your `photo-app` GitHub repo.

## 4. What to Turn In
Please consult the rubric below to ensure you have met the requirements for this assignment (all of the tasks with checkmarks next to them):

???

Then, when you're done, please submit a zipped folder (<a href="https://canvas.northwestern.edu/courses/157233/assignments/1007941" target="_blank">on Canvas</a>) called `hw02.zip` that contains all of the files you used to complete your project (feel free to just zip your entire photo-app folder). Make sure you include:
1. All of your templates and includes
1. Your stylesheet
1. A screenshot of your `photo-app` repository on GitHub. Otherwise, we won't be able to see it (since it's private).

If you collaborated with a partner, please name your partner as a comment on Canvas. To to this, after you submitted, please click the "Submission Details" link and add a note in the "Add a Comment" section.