---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: "PhotoApp: Client-Side Templating with JavaScript"
abbreviation: HW4
type: homework
due_date: 2022-02-15
ordering: 4
draft: 1
points: 25
---

## 1. Introduction

## 2. Set Up (Optional)
For this assignment, you're welcome to write all of your code from scratch and not use any of the templates. That said, if it is helpful to you...

1. Configure the API Tester
    * `app.py`
    * `static/api`
    * new model

2. Update the Post model and the `views/posts.py` endpoint
    * Describe changes

3. Note the structure of the `index.html` file (which will be populated using JavaScript).

## 3. Your Task

### Recreate the Display using JavaScript instead of Server-side includes
1. Stories Panel
2. Recommendations Panel
3. Posts Panel (Done For You)
4. User Profile

### 1. Commenting
#### Add a Comment
Type it into the bottom, click "post", appears as the last comment.

If there's a "more" link...
* the comment appears underneath the "more" link. 
* the # in the more links increments by 1.
* the person who is logged in (user id=12) also has the option of deleting their comment.

#### Remove a Comment
* Delete comment deletes the comment from the interface.
* decrements the "more" link.
* redraws the screen.

### 2. Liking
* Like/unlike a post
    * if the current user has liked it, the heart is red.
    * toggling the like makes the red change.
    * the red persists between refreshes.

### 3. Bookmarking (In Lab)
* Bookmark/unbookmark a bookmark

### 4. Following (In Class)
* Follow/unfollow a user

### 5. Post Detail
Makes a modal window...

### 6. Accessibility

## 4. What to Turn In