---
layout: assignment-two-column
title: "PhotoApp: Authentication"
abbreviation: HW5
type: homework
due_date: 2022-03-06
ordering: 5
draft: 0
points: 40
---

<style>
    table.cheatsheet th:first-child,
    table.cheatsheet td:first-child {
        min-width: 200px;
    }
    .compact li {
        margin-bottom: 4px;
        line-height: 1.5em;
    }
    table.rubric-indent th:first-child, table.rubric-indent td:first-child {
        min-width: 20px;
        width: 30px;
    }
    table.rubric-indent th:last-child, table.rubric-indent td:last-child {
        min-width: 100px;
        width: 100px;
    }
    table.rubric code, table.rubric-indent code {
        font-size: 1.1em;
        font-weight: bold;
    }
    table.rubric pre {
        font-size: 1.1em;
        /* font-weight: 600; */
        background: #F3F3F3;
        padding: 5px;
        border-radius: 5px;
    }
</style>

> ## Collaboration Policy
> Same deal as always: you are welcome to work in pairs (optional). You must still maintain your own code files via your own GitHub repository, and you must deploy your own Heroku instance. You are welcome to collaborate on code and discuss code and strategies with your partner. If you collaborate, you'll just list your partner in the comments section of Canvas. 

## 1. Introduction
In this homework assignment, you are going to lock down your system so that only logged in users can interact with it. This includes:

{:.compact}
1. Interacting with the API you built in HW3
2. Interacting with the user interface (UI) you built in HW4

To do this, we will be using JSON Web Tokens (JWTs). Please review the [Lecture 15](../lectures/lecture15) materials for the basic JWT workflow.

### 1. Cookies versus authorization headers
As discussed in lecture, you can pass JWTs between the client and the server in a variety of different ways: through cookies, custom HTTP headers, the request body, and/or as query parameters. In this assignment, you will be using the JWT "cookie approach" to handle authentication from within your UI, and the JWT "HTTP Header approach" to handle authentication for your REST API.

#### The Cookie Approach (for Browser-Based Interactions)
1. Your Flask UI will rely on JWT cookies. You will write code to generate these cookies on the server. Subsequently, these cookies will sent back and forth between the browser and the server via request and response headers (respectively). 
2. The `flask-jwt-extended` library has a few convenience functions that will help you generate and set these cookies:

    {:.compact}
    * `create_access_token()` -- generates the token
    * `set_access_cookies()` -- sets the access cookies on the response header
3. Workflow:

    {:.compact}
    * User sends username and password to the server via a login form.
    * If the credentials are valid, the server sets the JWT tokens using cookies.
    * Because the JWT cookies are set, the system will know who is logged in.
    * When the JWT access token expires, the system redirects the user to the login screen.

#### The HTTP Header Approach (for the REST API)
In the case of the REST API, your client may or may not be your Flask application. For instance, in HW3, the Python test suite and Postman were ***external clients***. But in HW4, the client was your `hw4.js` file, which *was* part of your UI.

##### Browser Clients
For internal clients that use your REST API, you need to embed something called an `X-CSRF-TOKEN` in the header of your fetch requests. Here is an example of how you might use fetch to access a protected REST Endpoint from within your UI (like you did in HW4):

```js
fetch("/api/posts", {
        method: "GET",
        headers: {
            'Content-Type': 'application/json',
            'X-CSRF-TOKEN': '5c4f034d-13d6-4aa2-b686-ee0add18426b'
        }
    })
    .then(response => response.json())
    .then(data => {
        console.log(data);
    });
```

##### Non-Browser Clients
For external clients, you need to offer them another way to access your REST API without actually having to log into your UI. To do this, you will implement:

{:.compact}
* A way for a user to authenticate with the REST API order to receive an access and refresh token.
* Security measures on all of your REST API endpoints that require an access token.

Here is an example of how you might use fetch to access a protected resource from an ***external*** python app (or from Postman), using an access token:

```python
import requests

response = requests.get(
    'http://localhost:5000/api/posts',
    headers={
        'Authorization': 'Bearer ' + access_token
    }
)
print('Status Code:', response.status_code)
print(response.json())
```


### 2. The Flask-JWT-Extended Library
To help you implement the JWT workflow, you will be using the `flask-jwt-extended` library, which offers some common JSON Web Token functionality that will help you. Please refer to the full documentation to get a more comprehensive explanation. Some links that we have found to be particularly helpful:

{:.compact}
* <a href="https://flask-jwt-extended.readthedocs.io/en/latest/options/#general-options" target="_blank">Configuration options</a>
* <a href="https://flask-jwt-extended.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/#verify-tokens-in-request" target="_blank">Verification & helper functionality</a>
* <a href="https://flask-jwt-extended.readthedocs.io/en/latest/refreshing_tokens/" target="_blank">Refreshing tokens</a>

<!-- 
#### Cheatsheet
Below are some key pieces of functionality that will be important to you as you implement authentication:

{:.cheatsheet}
| Description | Code | Notes |
|--|--|--|--|
| **Configuration** | |  | |
| Access Token Expiration | `JWT_ACCESS_TOKEN_EXPIRES` | defaults to 10 minutes |
| Refresh Token Expiration | `JWT_REFRESH_TOKEN_EXPIRES`| defaults to 30 days
| Secret (Salt for encryption algo) | `JWT_SECRET_KEY` | store in your .env file, not in your codebase |
| **Methods & Properties** | | | |
| Current User | `flask_jwt_extended.current_user` | property that stores a User object of the logged in user. Only works if you configure your "user_lookup_loader" (see below)|
| |  | |
| **Decorators** | | | |
| Current User function decorator | `@jwt.user_lookup_loader` | Decorator to be used to specify how the current user should be retrieved (given the identity info embedded in the token). |
 -->

## 2. Setup

### 1. Configure your local git repo
Before making any changes to your `photo-app` folder, let's create a snapshot of your current work (from HW04) by creating a `hw04` branch using git:

1. On your terminal or command line, navigate to your photo-app folder.
1. Using git, create a branch called hw04 as follows: `git checkout -b hw04`
1. Now type `git branch` and you should see several branches, including: `main` and `hw04`. Also note that you are currently on the `hw04` branch (it should be green with an asterik next to it).
1. Push your hw04 branch to GitHub as follows: `git push -u origin hw04`
1. Open GitHub in your web browser and verify that your hw04 branch is there.
1. Finally, on your local computer, switch back to your `main` branch (i.e., make `main` the active branch you're working on) by typing `git checkout main`.
1. Verify that you are on your `main` branch by typing `git branch` (you should see an asterik next to it).

### 2. Install dependencies:
* Install flask-jwt-extended using whatever method has worked for you in the past:<br> `pip3 install flask-jwt-extended`
* Add this line to your `requirements.txt` so that when you deploy your app to Heroku, it will also install the dependency on the Heroku container instance:<br> `Flask-JWT-Extended==4.3.1`

### 3. Create a new environment variable
In your `.env` file, add a new environment variable for your JWT secret. You can make this secret anything you want:

`JWT_SECRET=MY_SECRET`

### 4. Download & incorporate the starter files
Download hw05.zip and unzip it. 

<a class="nu-button" href="/winter2022/course-files/homework/hw05.zip">hw05.zip<i class="fas fa-download" aria-hidden="true"></i></a>

You should see a directory structure that looks like this:

```bash
hw05
├── app_updates.py
├── decorators.py
├── models
│   └── api_structure.py
├── populate.py
├── static
│   └── js
│       └── api.js
├── templates
│   ├── api
│   │   ├── api-docs.html
│   │   ├── include-endpoint-detail.html
│   │   └── include-form.html
|   ├── includes
|   |   └── navbar.html
│   └── login.html
├── tests_updated
│   ├── __init__.py
│   ├── run_tests.py
│   ├── test_bookmarks.py
│   ├── test_comments.py
│   ├── test_followers.py
│   ├── test_following.py
│   ├── test_like_post.py
│   ├── test_login.py
│   ├── test_logout.py
│   ├── test_posts.py
│   ├── test_profile.py
│   ├── test_stories.py
│   ├── test_suggestions.py
│   ├── test_token.py
│   └── utils.py
└── views
    ├── authentication.py
    └── token.py
```

Please integrate the starter files as follows:

| Source (`hw05`) || Destination (`photo-app`) | Action |
|--|--|--|--|
| app_updates.py | --> | app_updates.py | Add (new file) |
| decorators.py | --> | decorators.py | Add (new file) |
| populate.py | --> | populate.py | Replace |
| views/authentication.py |  --> |views/authentication.py | Add (new file) |
| views/token.py | --> | views/token.py | Add (new file) |
| tests_updated | --> | tests_updated | Add (entire folder) |
| templates/api | --> | templates/api | Replace (entire folder) |
| templates/login.html | --> | templates/login.html | Add (new file) |
| templates/navbar.html | --> | templates/navbar.html | Replace |
| static/js/api.js | --> | static/js/api.js | Replace |
| models/api_structure.py |  --> |models/api_structure.py | Replace |
| app_updates.py | --> | app.py | Integrate |

In regards to `app_updates.py`, please integrate the code into your `app.py` file:

{:.compact}
* Import statements at the top
* The rest after the `app` object has been initialized but before the `if __name__ == '__main__':`
* You may not want to copy over the new api_docs function 'til the very end.

### 5. Rebuild your database
When you're done, please rebuild your database `python3 populate.py` (or however you've done it in the past). There was a bug in how the passwords were hashed in the `users` table, which needs to be fixed for this assignment to work.

### 6. Run your old tests
Run your old tests (in the `tests` directory). They should all still pass). By the end of the assignment, all of the new tests (in the `tests_updated` directory) should pass.


## 3. Your Tasks
For this assignment, you will be implementing an authentication system for your REST API and for your app. There are 4 tasks you need to complete:

{:.compact}
1. [Securing the user interface](#ui)
1. [Deprecating the hard-coded reference to User #12](#deprecate)
1. [Securing the REST API](#rest)
1. [Deploying to Heroku](#heroku)


{:#ui}
### 1. Securing the User Interface (15 Points)
In order to implement authentication within your Photo App UI, you will:

<table class="rubric-indent">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Task</th>
            <th>Description</th>
            <th>Points</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="2">1. Create login form for UI</th>
            <th>7 points</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Create an HTML login form for your app (feel free to borrow code from the Lecture 15 files) by editing the <code>templates/login.html</code> html file. The form should POST to the <code>/login</code> endpoint.
            </td>
            <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Ensure that the form is accessible by using the Wave Chrome extension.
            </td>
            <td>1</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Implement the <code>/login</code> POST endpoint by editing <code>views/authentication.py</code>. If the enpoint receives a valid <code>username</code> and <code>password</code>, it should set the JWT cookie in the response header and redirect the user to the home screen (<code>/</code>).
            </td>
            <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                If the <code>/login</code> POST endpoint does not receive a valid username and password, redisplay the form with an appropriate error message. 
                <ul>
                    <li>When you're done, your <code>tests_updated/test_login.py</code> tests should pass.</li>
                </ul>
            </td> 
            <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="2">2. Create logout form for UI</th>
            <th>3 points</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Create logout endpoint (GET) by editing <code>views/authentication.py</code>. This endpoint should unset the JWT cookies and redirect the user to the <code>/login</code> page. When you're done, your <code>tests_updated/test_logout.py</code> tests should pass.
            </td>
            <td>3</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="2">3. Lockdown your UI Endpoints</th>
            <th>2 points</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Create a custom decorator(or use the existing on in `decorators.py`) to secure your <code>/</code> and <code>/api</code> endpoints:
                <ul class="compact">
                    <li>If the user is logged in (i.e. a JWT cookie is present), allow them to access the page.</li>
                    <li>If the user is not logged in, redirect them to the login page.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
            <td>2</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="2">4. Modify your JavaScript fetch statements</th>
            <th>3 points</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td></td>
            <td>
                Update your JavaScript fetch requests (from HW4) so that they use the <code>X-CSRF header token</code>. Otherwise, your POST, DELETE, and PATCH requests will be rejected by your API. For an example of how to do this, please see <code>static/js/api.js</code>.
            </td>
            <td>3</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

{:#deprecate}
### 2. Deprecating User #12 (5 Points)

Now that you've implemented a way for your user to log, you need display the logged in user's data. However, the way the application is currently configured, you're still displaying User #12. To fix this, you will need to deprecate `app.current_user`, which relies on the following code in `app.py`

```python
# set logged in user
with app.app_context():
    app.current_user = User.query.filter_by(id=12).one()
```

Luckily, the `flask-jwt-extended` library provides a way to do this. The approach:
1. Define a function that retrieves the User object based on the user_id that is embedded in the token.
2. Add the `@jwt.user_lookup_loader` decorator to the top of the function. By doing this, you can use the built-in `flask-jwt-extended.current_user` property to access the logged in user (works like magic).

**Sample code:**

First, define a function for retrieving a user from the database using the embedded JWT user_id:

```python
# defines the function for retrieving a user from the database
@jwt.user_lookup_loader
def user_lookup_callback(_jwt_header, jwt_data):
    # print('JWT data:', jwt_data)
    # https://flask-jwt-extended.readthedocs.io/en/stable/automatic_user_loading/
    user_id = jwt_data["sub"]
    return User.query.filter_by(id=user_id).one_or_none()
```

When you're done, replace any instance of `app.current_user` with `flask_jwt_extended.current_user`. 

{:#rest}
### 3. Securing the REST API (15 Points)
You will make the following changes to your REST API in order to implement JWT authentication:

{:.compact}
1. Create an endpoint to issue a access / refresh token.
2. Create an endpoint to issue a new access token (using your refresh token).
3. Lock down all of your endpoints.

<table class="rubric">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th>Method/Route</th>
            <th>Description</th>
            <th>Parameters</th>
            <th>Points</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>POST /api/token</td>
            <td>Issues an access and refresh token based on the credentials posted to the API Endpoint.<br><br>Example (truncated for readability):
            <pre>{
    "access_token": "e0e.dsc.3NI6Ij",
    "refresh_token": "e0e.mcm.6ktQ"
}</pre>
            </td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li><code>username</code> (string, required): The username of the person logging in.</li>
                    <li><code>password</code> (string, required): The password of the person logging in.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
            <td>5</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>POST /api/token/refresh</td>
            <td>
                Issues new access token if a valid refresh token is posted to the endpoint.<br><br>Example (truncated for readability):
                <pre>{
    "access_token": "e0e.Ras.i3NyZ"
}</pre>
            </td>
            <td>
                <ul>
                    <li><code>refresh_token</code> (string, required): The refresh token that was previously issued to the user from the /api/token endpoint.</li>
                </ul>
            </td>
            <td>5</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>All routes</td>
            <td>
                Lockdown all endpoints. Every API endpoint in the system should now require a JWT token. Hint: use the <code>@jwt_required()</code> decorator from the flask-jwt-extended library. Ensure that all tests pass with the new test suite.
            </td>
            <td></td>
            <td>5</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

 
* When you're done with parts 1-3, all of the tests in `tests_updated` should pass (just run `run_tests.py`).

{:#heroku}
### 4. Deploying to Heroku (5 Points)
Please check in all of your changes / additional files to Git, and deploy your completed app to Heroku.
* Reminders:
    * You'll need to add a new environment variable to Heroku called `JWT_SECRET`. We recommend that you use the same secret locally and on Heroku. To add an environment variable, go to the settings tab of your app and click the "Reveal Config Vars" button.
    * Don't forget to update your requirements.txt with the new dependency you introduced: `Flask-JWT-Extended==4.3.1`.
    * Don't forget to rebuild your remote database because of the "password bug" in the previous version of `populate.py`. To do this, just change the DB_URL in your `.env` file so that it's pointing to your cloud database, and then run `python3 populate.py`. 
* If you already have your Heroku app set to auto-deploy, then your changes will automatically deploy once you push your changes to GitHub, and you therefore don't need to do anything.
* If your app is not set to auto-deploy, make sure to navigate to the "Deploy" tab and click the "Deploy" button.

## 4. What to Turn In
Please review the requirements above and ensure you have met them. Specifically:

{:.medium}
| Points | Category |
|--|--|
| [15 points](#ui) | User Interface Related Tasks |
| [5 points](#deprecate)  | Deprecate User #12 |
| [15 points](#rest)  | REST API Tasks |
| [5 points](#heroku)  | Deploy to Heroku |

### Canvas Submission
When you're done, please submit the following to Canvas:

{:.checkbox-list}
* A zip file of your code
* A comment that includes the following:
    * A link to your Heroku app
    * The name of your partner (if applicable)
